All right, tape is going, sir. The one thing I didn't get into last time, the
two areas would be your involvement in script writing, TVs and movies, and also
your poetry, so let me just ask a couple questions about the, say, your
television writing. You've written for many television shows such as, I guess,
Twilight Zone, Alfred Hitchcock, and so forth. Do you still do that, or is that
phase of your career over? No, I've had two things on this year. The Electric
Grandmother, which was starring Maureen Stapleton. And it's been on twice now
since January, a one-hour show about a robot grandmother that raises children.
And it turned out very well. I was very proud of it. And then another of my
scripts was Any Friend of Nicholas Nickleby's is a Friend of Mine, starring Fred
Gwynne, playing the part of a false Charles Dickens, and this was based
basically on a stage play of mine that I did in Los Angeles a few years ago.
Yeah, I realize you'd done those. I was sort of getting at those sort of a
series kind of show where you had to write something on cue. Well, I tried never
to do that anyway. I had a very friendly relationship with Alfred Hitchcock and
all of his partners there, Joan Harrison and Norman Lloyd. and I'd go out and
have a casual lunch, tell them an idea. They'd OK it. I'd go home and write it
and come back with a finished script, and we'd have another lunch. If they could
argue me into any changes, I'd make them, and if I could argue them into the
logic of my situation, it stayed the way it was. So it was a very amiable, very
friendly thing. I never did a lot of scripts. I wouldn't let myself get bullied
into being a full-time writer because no one remembers who writes scripts for
television anyway. Were any of those things you did for those shows based on
your own stories? Most of them were. I did three one-hour shows for Hitchcock
for his big one-hour series, and then I did eight or nine scripts, maybe 10 or
12 for the half-hour series, and all but one of those were my own stories. .
Okay. Two of the... I guess the movies that go back to the... ... gosh, I guess
the 60s, I think were made from your short stories. It came from outer space and
The Beast for 20,000 Fathoms, is that right? That's correct. . The beast from 20
,000 Fathoms, that was done from the story... Was it called Foghorn? . No. It
was a story called The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms. It appeared in the Shared
Keenean Post. And that was the title they put on it. later I changed the title
when I put it in one of my books and called it The Foghorn. Okay, and was it the
that was the one you did with Ray Harryhausen, wasn't it? That's correct.
You're such a lover of books and so forth. I wonder how you give so much energy
to the visual arts. Well, I grew up with all these loves. If I have any capacity
at all it's to be in love in six or seven different ways. So I've always been
madly in love with motion pictures. My mother was a fiend for them and took me
to see hundreds of films from the age of when I was two until up until I was 10,
11, or 12. So that never left me, and I think I'm very fortunate to have a great
love of films, a great love of libraries and books, a great love of radio, and
the famous people in radio. When I came west to live in Los Angeles, I headed
downtown immediately and got to know all the people on an old radio broadcast
called Hollywood Hotel. And L sampler Parsons became a friend to this 13, 14
-year-old boy. And I knew Burns and Allen during those years of 1934, 35, 36. I
wrote scripts for them every week and added them in. and, of course, I doubt if
they even read them, but they pretended that they did, and they were very kind
to me, and then I was in love with Orson Welles when he came on the scene in
radio, and Suspense, and Norman Corwin, who became my friend when I was 27 years
old. So I grew up then with a love of libraries, a love of radio, a love of
films, and I think I'm very lucky that I've been able to work in all of these
different mediums and do rather well in each one of them. How many of your plays
have been performed? Oh, I would say somewhere around 14 or 15 of them. Most of
them I've produced myself. Dandelion Wine here on the coast recently, back east
a few years ago. The Martian Chronicles, which I produced here at a small
theater. Fahrenheit 451 two years ago, which turned out very well. A wonderful
ice cream suit, then six or seven of my one-act plays. I've had The Anthem
Sprinters, which is all of my Irish experiences. So I've had a lot of fun with
it, and I've made a lot of friends among actors. I've worked with a lot of good
people, including James Whitmore, who appeared in my first one-act play here,
and had a benefit for the United Nations about 23 years ago.
Okay, let me move on to your poetry, because we just, since I talked to you
last, we've gotten this new book, The Complete Poems of Ray Bradbury. Yep. What
determines, when the muse comes on you, what determines whether you write a
story, a poem, a play, an opera, or whatever? I haven't the faintest idea. It
just knocks me over. Sometimes in the middle of writing a poem, I'll say, oh my,
this is too big for a poem. I may very well finish the poem, but then I sit down
and turn it into a short story immediately. or on a rare occasion it turns into
a stage play or a novel. But that doesn't happen as often. Most of the time I
work in the short form. But quite often you take the simplest idea and it
evolves from the poetry form into... Well, I was, for instance, I was driving
around in England a few years ago and a chauffeur of our car was talking about
driving and the Irish and funerals Irish wakes and what have you and he told of
this one wake of some friends of his in a small town in Ireland where an English
lord lived nearby and when he died he went against the old saying you can't take
it with you and he took with him all of his wine and he had all the thousands of
bottles of wine in his cellar poured into his grave well Well, it was such a
great idea that I wrote it as a short story last week and sent it off, and it'll
probably be in Playboy sometime in the next few, four, five months. Yeah, good.
You mentioned in the introduction to that book, I think I know what you mean by
it, but you said that your poems write you. Yes, they do, just as my stories do.
I don't control them. They write what they want to say. okay well uh I
personally I personally responded just a few of the poems in there or all of
them I did but I thought that some of them were exceptionally good the um the
one that you yourself like the boys across the street are driving my young
daughter mad the haunted computer and the android pope the attic where the
meadow greens and abandoned in place I thought those were excellent works um do
you have any that you think are particularly you're particularly fond of that
you think are particularly good? No, I think you've named some of the good ones,
and at the time I write them, of course, I think each one is good, or I wouldn't
have put it in the book. I try not to ever publish a poem or a short story that
I've gotten tired of. I assume that you'll continue to write poetry then. Oh,
yes, yes, yes.
Okay, you've written novels, short stories, poems, plays, operas, scripts, Is
there anything you haven't tried? I can't think of anything offhand now that I'm
working on this libretto for this opera. That sort of rounds out the list. I'm
working on a detective murder mystery novel now which I've never done before. So
it's a change for me in the novel form. I've been a great lover and admirer of
Dashiell Hammett and Raymond Chandler for the last 40 years or so. and always
wanted to do something in that field. But I was afraid to do it because I wasn't
well enough educated even though I'd read hundreds of novels in the field when I
was younger. It didn't seem to get into my bloodstream. But now I think I'm old
enough and I hope I've learned my lessons and when the novel comes out people
will agree that it's at least an agreeable competitor in the field. Do you have
any date when that might come out? No, I would say about a year from now. It's
right up close to being finished. I've been working on it seven or eight years.
But you never know. I might finish it all in one week in the next week or two.
And, again, I may drag on for another six months. I'm not in charge. I don't
make the decisions.
Okay. You're obviously extremely hard to categorize or to pinpoint. What do you
think? what do you think or how do you respond when you're categorized or called
a science fiction writer. Does that bother you? Well, it can. Depends on how
it's used. Some people use it with prejudice. There are still some librarians in
the country, there's still some critics, there's still some teachers who think
that science fiction isn't worth bothering with, and of course that drives me
wild. So their opinion actually irritates me, because to me, it's the central
fiction of our time. We are a science-oriented, technologically oriented people
and there's nothing else to write about except human beings in some sort of
relationship with their ideas, with their machineries, with their technologies.
All the major problems of our time right now are technological, scientific,
moral problems. What do you do with the automobile? What do you do with nuclear
power? What do you do with cloning? What do you do with DNA experimentation? All
these problems that arise as soon as you invent something new. So all of our
major problems right now, you can't name one that's not connected to a machine
somewhere down the line. You see no opposition or antagonism, do you, between
the arts and the sciences? There shouldn't be. I mean, after all, especially in
science fiction, were cooperating to give scientists ideas so that they can
create new ways of living. Without the creative thought of the poet, the
filmmaker, the novelist of 100 years ago, we wouldn't be on the moon. We're on
the moon at this very moment because Jules Verne put us there first. Okay,
excellent. I guess you wouldn't agree with what Plato had to say in his Republic
about the danger of imaginative literature then? Well, there's always been bad
talk among intellectuals who don't stop and think what they're saying. It's a
very dumb remark. I mean, if you don't have an imagination, you can't survive.
If you don't have some sort of creative instinct in you, how do you think people
survive Buchenwald? Those who survive survive it with their imagination. A lot
of them were able to imagine at times for a little while they were somewhere
else. If you're in a jail, if people are dying all around you, you damn well
better have the power of imagination so that you can imagine a future where this
will stop or you can imagine a present where you're not there for a little
while. To live inside your head and to forget the horror that surrounds you.
That's a huge thing to be able to do, and a lot of people did it. It's
remarkable, it's miraculous. but that's what a human being is a miraculous
animal in the history of the world who's able to survive okay I just have a
couple more here in reading your work I obviously have picked up your admiration
for George Bernard Shaw but I've never heard a statement or read a statement
from you as to why you admire him so much well my god he is of all the writers
of our time just about at least on the when you think of Irish-English
literature for the theater, he is the idea writer of all idea writers, he and G
.K. Chesterton and a few others, but he sort of outraces and outpaces everyone.
You name a subject, and he just pretty well wrote about it 70 years ago, 100
years ago, 90 years ago. He was interested in theology. He was interested in
machinery. He was interested in the future. He was interested in biology. He had
a far-ranging curiosity about mankind and the future of mankind. So he wrote
science fiction as well as doing theological studies and great characters from
history like Saint John. I'm so sorry that I never had a chance to get to Europe
while he was still alive. Okay, this is sort of a strange question, but if you
don't like to answer it you won't have to, but what books would you pick to, or
what books or authors would you think you'd pick to educate a young person from?
Well, I would recommend George Bernard Shaw. As soon as someone was old enough,
I don't think you can give Shaw to children. nor can you give him to kids in
high school. But as soon as people get into college, then I would bring Shaw out
and give them a complete education in ideas and how to think. And at the lower
level, I'd imagine I would start them with Jules Verne and H.G. Wells, the
Science Fiction writers, because kids really are interested in ideas. and it's
very playful. It's wonderful to have an interest in such things. And that's the
reason why science fiction during the last few years have been so popular in the
high schools, in the junior high schools. The kids recognize that these fictions
deal with very real problems that must be solved, and you have the fun of
playing with those toys inside your head.
Okay, say a hundred years two hundred years from now. Is there any particular
thing in all your work that you'd like to be remembered for? Oh, I hope that
something wicked this way comes and is still around. I think it's a universal
book, at least I hope it is. It deals with children and growing up and growing
old and getting sick and dying, all the things that happened to all the people
in the history of the world. I hope the book won't age. That it would belong to
no special time, but to all times. It's my favorite, and I love it because I
suppose I'm locked into it with my father. My father is the hero of the book. I
didn't know that at the time I wrote it. One night I got up and wandered around
the house and picked up the book and started to reread it, and suddenly cried
out, and tears burst through my eyes, and I realized that I'd written my father
into the book as Mr. Holloway, who was the hero of the entire structure. So
that's one of the reasons why I love it. I hope it will have a little life after
I'm gone. Yeah, we're going to teach a fantasy class here next semester at the
college, and that's one of the books we're going to teach. Oh, great. In fact,
we should be teaching that class right after the movie comes out. Now, that's
due the first of the year, right? I hope it will be. We're still working on the
special effects. So it may be February or March. That'll be just about right.
We'll just take the whole class down. Good enough. Okay, let me ask one more.
You've already mentioned the novel you were working on and so forth. But do you
have any plans, or are you working on any more novels or stories besides the
ones you mentioned? Oh, yeah. I've got seven or eight other new short stories
I've been working on recently. So I'll have another book of short stories out in
about a year. in more poems and more plays and a huge book on creativity and my
own ideas. I've written a sort of autobiographical charting of where I get my
ideas and how I wrote all of my novels. I want to do a sort of book similar to,
but certainly not equal to, were summing up by Somerset Maugham. And I think
ideas are fascinating. Where do you get a story idea and what do you do with it?
And after all I've sort of put four or five hundred stories. So that would make,
I think, an intricate.